---
title: NGOs and Authoritarianism
author:
- name: Andrew Heiss
  affiliation: Brigham Young University
  email: andrew_heiss@byu.edu
date: April 19, 2018
published: "Forthcoming in the *Routledge Handbook of NGOs and International Relations*"
abstract: >-
  Sphinx of black quartz: judge my vow.
reference-section-title: References
mainfont: Cardo
sansfont: Asap Condensed
---

In April 2018, the Chinese Ministry of State Security published a pamphlet in conjunction with the country’s third annual National Security Education Day. This 8-panel comic (see @fig:comic) tells the story of a suspicious white NGO worker who collaborates with Chinese labor activists to spread Western notions of labor rights. The Westerner begins by recruiting potential Chinese collaborators and then works with his newfound counterparts to offer workshops and trainings to local workers. After instilling Western ideas of labor unions, Chinese workers take to the streets in strikes, overseen by the Western NGO worker who excitedly promises to pay his Chinese counterpart for the successful protest. A worker later discovers the connection between the Western and Chinese activists and dutifully reports it to the police, who extract a full confession from the Chinese activist. In the final panel, the Westerner unceremoniously escapes arrest and runs away from the country. Concluding with the caption "Banish foreign enemies and punish them severely," the comic emphasizes the need to ward off the destabilizing influences of Western NGOs and identifies these organizations as direct threats to national security.

![**Translation**: *Panel 1 (top left)*: Caption: Foreign institutions recruit candidates | dialogue: "Nice to meet you! I think our ideas of labor unions are worth promoting." "Nice to meet you too! I'll do my best."; *Panel 4 (top right)*: Caption: Loosen the soil at the grassroots, inflicting latent harm | text on board: "Western theories of labor. Western theories of unions."; *Panel 5 (bottom left)*: Caption: Illegal street marches | dialogue: "I'll pay you the rest after this event is over" | protest signs: "Raise wages and decrease work hours! Work with dignity!"; *Panel 8 (bottom right)*: Caption: Banish foreign enemies and punish them severely. **Source**: @ChinaFile:2018; Chinese Ministry of State Security.](images/china-comic.jpg){#fig:comic}

This anti-foreign NGO campaign came on the heels of China's new Overseas NGO Law, which came into effect in January 2017. The 2017 Overseas NGO requires that all foreign NGOs be aligned with and monitored by a domestic organization, or Professional Supervisory Unit, and imposes strict requirements on the issue areas foreign NGOs can address, limiting them to education, technology, sports, poverty alleviation, and other non-contentious issues. The law was specifically designed to limit Western influence and insulate China's domestic NGO sector from foreign values, allowing the CCP to "better protect China from perceived external threats to its sovereignty and social stability" [@Shieh:2017].

China's anti-NGO law is part of a larger global trend of closing civic space in authoritarian regimes. Crackdowns and restrictions on NGOs have increased in frequency and severity. In 2015, Russia passed its Undesirable Organizations law, giving the government the ability to blacklist any foreign or international organization and force them to shut down. In May 2017, Egyptian president ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ al-Sīsī signed legislation that had sat in draft form since the 2011 uprising, imposing harsh jail sentences for any foreign NGO undertaking political activities or operating without paying a substantial registration fee. Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Myanmar, Cambodia, Bahrain, Hungary, and other authoritarian regimes have passed similar restrictive NGO laws in recent years. In its 2017 report on global civic space, CIVICUS found that only 3% of the world's population lives in open societies with minimal restrictions on associational activity, with the majority living in countries with obstructed or repressed civic space [@CIVICUS:2017].

Despite this increasingly closed space for global civil society, international NGOs (INGOs) continue to operate in authoritarian regimes, even in counties that have become more hostile. As of May 1, 2018, over one thousand foreign NGOs have gained either permanent or temporary official legal status in China under the provisions of the 2017 Foreign NGO law, including ten that work on labor issues—the subject of the national security cartoon [@Batke:2018]. More curiously, since the 1990s, China has strategically invited dozens of Western NGOs to set up offices locally, specifically to provide policy guidance and technical governing expertise [@Wheeler:2013]. Greenpeace—one of the most radical and outspoken INGOs in environmental advocacy—has offices in Beijing and has helped draft laws related to renewable energy and other environmental issues [@Teets:2014]. Though the 2018 comic and the 2017 law emphasize the national security risks of foreign NGOs, consulting with INGOs is a regular policy practice for the Chinese government. 

This chapter examines this perplexing phenomenon. Authoritarian restrictions on domestic and international civil society have increased over the past decade, but authoritarian states continue to allow—and even invite—NGOs to work in their countries. Though the services and advocacy provided by NGOs can challenge the legitimacy and power of authoritarian regimes, the majority of autocratic states allow NGO activities, and NGOs in turn continue to work in these countries in spite of the heavy legal restrictions and attempts to limit their activities. This chapter examines the theories about and the experiences of domestic and international NGOs working in authoritarian countries. The review is premised on the theory of authoritarian institutions: dictators delegate political authority to democratic-appearing institutions in order to remain in power and maintain stability. After providing a brief overview of authoritarian institutionalism, I discuss how domestic and international NGOs fit into authoritarian stability-seeking calculus. I then look at the global crackdown on civil society in the context of authoritarian stability and explore the effects of the increasingly restricted civil society legal environment on NGOs in these countries. Finally, I conclude with suggestions for future research on NGOs and their relationship with and role in authoritarian regimes.

